[Music]
with the lead steward please come to the
flight deck immediately sounds like one
of those in-flight announcements from a
dramatic plane crash movie no one would
ever want to hear this in reality
unfortunately it's exactly with the
passengers on Air Transat flight 236
heard as their plane ran out of fuel
somewhere above the Atlantic it was
supposed to be a regular flight for Air
Transat from Toronto Canada to Lisbon
Portugal the weather was fine that
August evening and flight 236 took off
without delays at 8:52 p.m. it had 306
people on board 293 passengers and 13
crew members most of the passengers were
Canadians excited about their summer
vacation in Europe and Portuguese
expatriates going to visit their family
across the ocean the flight captain was
Robert P Shea a 48 year old pro with
16,800 hours of flight experience his
co-pilot was dirt - Jagger a 28 year old
who had 4,800 flight hours the Airbus
a330 243 they operated was fairly new
with only 2 years of active service and
with 362 seats not all of them were full
for this flight it had two powerful
rolls-royce Trent engines and one
interesting detail four and a half tons
more fuel than it required when it took
off there were no red flags no warnings
of an emergency yet eight hours later
when the plane should have touched down
in Lisbon it was nowhere to be seen
at 438 UTC the right engine of the
aircraft started losing fuel
the pilots didn't know about it yet at
503 UTC after over 4 hours of a totally
normal flight the first alarming message
came through the on-board computer
informed the pilots that the oil
temperature had dropped and the oil
pressure was higher than normal on
engine 2 that same right engine the
experienced pilots believed the message
to be a false alarm
they informed the maintenance control
center about it but stayed calm assuming
there was no reason to worry at 5:36 UTC
another warning came through this time
about a fuel imbalance
the pilots again thought it was a false
alarm and followed protocol for the
situation they tried to transfer fuel
from the left wing tank to the right
wing tank to recover the imbalance but
that didn't help because the fuel line
was already damaged and the aircraft was
losing fuel at an alarming rate of one
gallon per second as a result the oil
temperature continued to drop and the
oil pressure continued to rise it was at
this time that the pilots realized
something must have actually gone wrong
and called the lead Stewart to the cabin
they asked her to look through one of
the passenger windows to see if the fuel
was leaking from under the right wing
but the night sky was pitch black and
she couldn't tell you can imagine what
was going on in the pilots minds at that
moment an emergency landing with a fuel
tank is always a huge risk but ignoring
the warnings and continuing with the
flight would be an even greater risk
at 5:45 UTC the pilots made the decision
to divert the plane to the Azores and
landed at logis airbase three minutes
later they informed santa maria oceanic
air traffic control they had a fuel
emergency this message informs ground
services that an aircraft has less fuel
than needed to finish the fly at 613 UTC
when the plane was at 39,000 feet and
still 170 miles away from lodges engine
two failed completely from lack of fuel
as scary as it sounds an Airbus can
actually fly on one engine and the
pilots were well aware of that of course
but now that they realized that the
threat was more than real they decided
to try and save the fuel in engine one
and shut off the transfer pump the plane
can't keep to the same altitude with one
engine as with two of them so they
started gradually descending worried
that the second engine wouldn't last
either the pilot sent a distress call to
santa maria oceanic traffic control they
call it mayday in aviation 13 minutes
later and 75 miles away from the base
engine number one ran out of fuel as
well when interviewed about that
situation later captain p'chai told the
reporters when you don't have that other
engine sooner or later you're going to
go down you know all that mattered to
him was to save the lives of the
passengers and crew they only had one
option now to collide for the rest of
the distance to the base mr. de jagger
who was the co-pilot on flight 236
remembers they were flying as if in a
simulator dealing with new problems that
arose every minute it was clearly not a
common situation so they had to think
fast and make quick decisions to control
it all somehow the plane lost its main
source of electrical power but it still
had the emergency ram air turbine it
only produced enough energy to power 30
percent of the plane systems and so the
flaps alternate breaks and spoilers all
turned off
the intercom system also shut down so
copilot de jagger had to shout safety
instructions to the cabin crew and as
much as the crew wanted to reach the
airbase
they couldn't rule out the possibility
of a water landing and told the
passengers to put on life vests the real
panic in the cabin started when the
oxygen mask dropped out at 6:31 UTC all
emergency services were activated on the
ground waiting for the plane to land
safely
the pilots realized they only had 15 to
20 minutes and one attempt to touch down
safely and save the passengers the fact
that they could now see the airbase in
the distance gave them some hope the
passengers meanwhile we're praying to
come out of this alive one of them who
was flying to Lisbon with her husband
later remembered they grabbed each
other's hands real tight hoping not to
fall in the ocean the aircraft was
barely controllable gliding down on
small propellers which gave it only
minimum hydraulics the pilots realized
it was going way too high and way too
fast for a safe landing the captain made
one 360-degree turn and a few s turns to
get at least somewhat lower you can only
imagine the panic in the cabin at that
time the worst nightmare of any era phob
was coming true
at 6:45 UTC the plane finally touched
ground at the air base but it wasn't
exactly a smooth landing they were
coming in too fast and even though the
pilots used emergency braking the plane
only stopped 7600 feet from the
threshold of a runway that was 10,000
feet long the anti-skid and brake
modulation systems were all off eight
out of ten wheels locked up and tires
were exploding one by one at this point
as one passenger recalls some people
were applauding the pilots and others
were sobbing they all had two things in
common shock and terror some people were
so paralyzed by fear they needed help
getting off the plane believe it or not
the plane with two dead engines and no
fuel glided for seventy-five miles and
landed safely the crew of Air Transat
236 was the first in history to ever
pull off a landing like this 14
passengers and two crew members needed
some medical help and two people got
seriously injured during the evacuation
but the most important thing was that no
one died on that flight
the pilots were heroes who saved
hundreds of lives but it was extremely
important that they find out how they
got into this situation to begin with
the aviation accidents prevention and
investigation Department of Portugal
together with the Canadian and French
authorities started the investigation it
turned out that just five days before
the incident on August 19th 2001
maintenance staff installed a new right
engine it didn't come with a hydraulic
pump so they decided to take one from a
similar engine and attach it to the new
one that was of course contrary to
manufacturer's instructions and even
though the difference was insignificant
to the human eye you now know what had
all led to there was a leak in the fuel
hose and it could have killed 306 people
when Air Transat admitted their fall the
in government find them around $250,000
which was the largest fine in the
history of Canada as of 2009 a few
months after the incident when the
aircraft had been repaired it resumed
flight with air transit and was
nicknamed Azores glider and as of
December 2018 it's still active with a
different airline the miracle that
happened over the Atlantic thanks to the
professionalism of the crew inspired an
episode of a Canadian TV show Mayday the
episode aired in 2003 and was called
flying on empty in 2010 a biographical
drama about the pilot Robert P Shea came
out named cachet the landing of a man
now are you afraid of flying or do you
enjoy it let me know down in the
comments if you learn something new
today thinking this video a like and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
anywhere just yet we have over 2000 cool
videos for you to check out all you have
to do is pick the left or right video
click on it and enjoy stay on the bright
side of life